Ethical analysis of a security-related scenario

Author: James Commons
Date: 10/16/2024

I am choosing to analyze scenario #1: responsible reporting of security
vulnerabilities. 

A. 
The main ethical question in this scenario is whether or not I should tell
InstaToonz about the bug or not. On the one hand, the potential privacy breach
is massive, as it could affect hundreds of millions of people. On the other
hand, I have a reasonable belief that disclosing this bug directly to
InstaToonz will land me in legal trouble. The ethical question at hand is
whether or not the privacy of InstaToonz users is worth putting myself in legal
jeopordy. Even if I never broke any laws, a lawsuit could still cost me a lot
of money since I would need to hire a lawyer, and chances are InstaToonz would
pull out all the stops since they sound pretty litigious. Of course, there is
also the possibility that I did violate the DMCA, in which case, an additional
question is whether or not it is ethical to break the law to protect people's
data (victimless crime).

B. 
The first stakeholder I will consider are the InstaToonz users whose data
might be compromised. They have a right to privacy. They are using InstaToonz's
software with an assumption that their DMs are not visible to just anyone
(maybe if a government agency has a warrant, sharing this data is justified, but 
sharing the data to random people is not). The second stakeholder I will
consider is InstaToonz. I don't know exactly how to phrase this, but they have
a right to not be hacked. Basically, I'm trying to say that any intentional
attempt to steal user data from InstaToonz, or compromize their IT
infrastructure in any way, is (or should be) illegal. InstaToonz also has
copyright, and they are protected by DMCA. This means that it is specifically
illegal to bypass any copy-protection or encryption meant to protect
InstaToonz's copyright (no matter how rudimentary these protections are). The
final stakeholder I would like to consider is myself. I have a right to use the
internet and play around with InstaToonz's software, but I don't have a right
to intentionally try to break into their systems. However, if I were to
discover a bug by accident, I should not be held liable for that vulnerability.

C.
It would be useful to know how I came accross the vulnerability. It is possible
that I was accidentally doing something illegal (especially if I was poking
around TPM stuff). It would also be useful to know if there is some third-party
entity that I can trust to responsibly disclose the vulnerability to
InstaToonz so I don't have to worry about the legal repercusions myself, perhaps 
some sort of government agency.

D.
There are three things I could do. The first is that I could do nothing. In
this case, my legal trouble would likely be non-existant, however I would be
putting user data in jeopordy. If I were to do this, then a few things could
happen:

1. The bug goes unnoticed forever (unlikely)
2. The bug gets noticed by an InstaToonz developer and gets fixed
3. The bug gets noticed by another security researcher, who discloses it to
   InstaToonz
4. A malicious entity finds the bug and uses it to compromise user data

I could also disclose the bug publicly. This would be a bad idea since any
malicous person could use that information to steal user data, but the bug
would also be fixed relatively quickly by InstaToonz. This would almost
certainly put me in legal trouble since I'm sure InstaToonz would be even more
angry at me for doing this than disclosing the bug privately.

Speaking of which, I could also disclose the bug privately to InstaToonz. This
would give their engineers time to fix the bug, but it would also likely mean
I would be facing a lawsuit. I could also be facing additional felony charges
related to violating DMCA, which means steep penalties and long jail times if
convicted. 

E.
ACM section 1.2 advises to avoid harm. However, in this scenario, one of the
parties is always likely to be harmed. If I were to stay silent about the bug,
then hundreds of millions of people could be harmed. This harm would not be
trivial either. Relationships could fail, stalkers could find out more
information about someone they are stalking, and if financial data was leaked,
identity theives could use people's information to steal millions of dollars
and ruin many people's lives. On the other hand, if I were to disclose the bug,
I could be harmed financially, as well as mentally and physically if I were to
go to jail for my actions.

ACM section 1.3 advises to be honest and trustworthy. This suggests that if I 
were to disclose the bug, I should not lie about how I came across it.

ACM section 1.5 advises that I respect people's intellectual property. Ideally,
I never violated DMCA when I found the bug, but I don't really think that even
if I had done so, it goes against the code of ethics. DMCA is rather archaic
after all.

ACM section 1.6 and 1.7 say to respect privacy and confidentiality. This means
that when I find the bug, I should not use it to gain access to people's data.

F. 
I recommend (to myself I guess) that I disclose the bug to the company
anonymously. I would likely set up a burner email and get in touch with someone
in the company. Ideally, I would find an engineer or IT professional on
InstaToonz's website who I could email. I would have to take care to make
sure that I am actually disclosing the bug to the right person. This would
involve many back and forth emails, as well as verifying the domain in the
email addresses. This would hopefully mean we get the best of both worlds. 
InstaToonz's users' data is safe, and I don't face legal repercussions.

As for the question about whether or not it is ethical to violate DMCA, I think
in a scenario like this, absolutely (unless I found the bug while trying to
bypass TPM for my own nefarious reasons). 

